hi there I'm Brett Hall the host of
topcast
[Laughter]
I've just always wanted to say that I
think okay so something a little
different today something remarkable
came across my Twitter feed this week
and I'm not going to spend this episode
at all talking about just Twitter as can
probably be gathered from the title of
this video it was Bertrand Russell
delivering a message to his descendants
but not just any descendants his
descendants A Thousand Years hence on
the one hand remarkable because this was
Russell one of the 20th Century's
intellectual luminaries speaking on film
which is always great and there's a
number of you know there's hours of him
recorded on film it's great to get these
people on film and you know great to
have access to these people on film and
to see what they thought about their
time and you know issues perhaps of
their time and of what they thought the
future was going to be like that kind of
thing you know Russell was absolutely a
first-rate intellect he you know among
other things he taught Wittgenstein
let's not hold that against him
um he alongside his teacher his own
teacher Alfred North Whitehead the two
of them wrote something called the
principia Mathematica which was a book
intended to lay the foundations of all
of mathematics so take calculus take set
theory I think take geometry take logic
arithmetic take the whole lot and boil
it down to a set of axioms and from that
Master set of axioms you'd be able to
derive anything that could be derived in
mathematics you'd have this complete set
of mathematics it would it would
essentially this system this book this
way of approaching mathematics could
potentially reduce mathematics to a
meactive calculation whatever the
mathematical problem was just enter it
into your system ultimately a computer
of some kind and by the end of the
process of calculation you'd get your
answer how this was possible well
Russell and Whitehead didn't bring give
you they were seeking out these ultimate
foundations seeking out this as I say
master set of axioms from which
everything could be derived now in the
field of logic you know never mind
mathematics itself but you know in some
sense a little deeper The Logical
underpinnings of mathematics the idea
here is that well there's there's two
parts of a logical or mathematical
system that you kind of want to discuss
and one is whether or not the system is
sound soundness of a logical system
means that if you can prove something
then you've proved it true you're not
going to prove falsehoods you're going
your valid proofs are going to lead to
valid theorems that's what soundness is
about you're not going to be able to
prove a contradiction using your system
okay your system is going to lead to
truth necessary truth in mathematics or
at least knowledge of necessary truth as
we say it's not going to lead you into
complete falsehood that's what soundness
is about if you take the axioms of
arithmetic you're going to prove things
that are true about arithmetic you're
not going to prove things that are false
about arithmetic as long as you're
following the rules and the rules are
operating as expected so that's one
thing that's soundness but also we have
an idea of what's known as completeness
in other words for everything possible
that you can write down that is true in
your system every single theorem that
you can write down there is a proof for
that thing so this is what this is what
Russell and Whitehead were doing in the
principia they were attempting of one of
the first projects of showing that
mathematics would
as the emperor says there the
mathematics would be complete well of
course it turned out there was a spanner
in the works but it was a good spanner
it turns out it it it it enabled us to
show that mathematics would remain
forever a creative exercise not just a
mechanical process
mathematics it turned out was not
complete this was shown by Kurt girdle
Kurt girdles incompleteness theorem as a
proof of
the incompleteness of mathematics in
fact it was the proof of the
incompleteness of simple arithmetic
using what are known as Pino's axioms
but the wider conclusion is inescapable
for any axiomatic system of sufficient
richness there would be statements that
you could write down that would be true
but which would have no proof there
would be no proof that you could ever
demonstrate that that thing was actually
true or false you know you would have
undecidable propositions undecidable
theorems theorems that must either be
true or false but you'd never know you'd
never be able to find out using that
system now as I say this has to be about
sufficient richness of the axioms not
all systems are incomplete not all
logical systems are incomplete some
systems are sound and complete and I've
mentioned this before on topcast it's
every logic student's privilege if they
learn enough about this stuff to end up
going about the proof force soundness
and completeness of sentential logic the
the baby form of logical most basic form
of logic that one can study Kurt girdle
actually showed the next most
complicated form of logic a little bit
more complicated than basic sentential
or propositional logic something called
predicate logic or first order logic
that even that was itself complete that
was sounding complete
that that form of logic predicate logic
is all about quantifiers so it includes
all the stuff that baby logic has that
propositional logic has about you know
if than and what and means and what all
means and what not means those kind of
things but it adds to that system the
claims about for all things and that
there exists some X you know that kind
of thing so it quantifies things it
talks about a quantity of something for
all things or for at least one thing and
that's what that's what girdle did for
his PhD thesis he proved the
completeness of predicate logic and then
he followed it up with later on after he
did his PhD that arithmetic was itself
incomplete and he became famous for this
of course because it answered what's
known as Hilbert's second problem
Hilbert had a list of 23 problems that
were outstanding in mathematics that he
thought were really important to solve
and girdle solve the second one on the
list to show that the axioms or
arithmetic were complete and he showed
that they were incomplete and in doing
so it put pay to Russell and Whitehead's
thesis or project from the principia but
the principia Still Remains a great work
of logic and Mathematics so back back to
Russell now this is that's just setting
the scene for who this guy is if you
haven't heard of him before what I'm
going to show you now is the video it's
in the public domain it was you know
first produced in 1959 so well outside
copyright one hopes you know I get
copyright strikes for
all sorts of strange things
um this is Russell in 1959 a man born in
1872 and what he's doing here as you
will hear is giving advice to Future
generations and like I say not just any
future Generations not like just his his
own kids or his grandkids or something
like that it's people a thousand years
into the future well let's just watch it
first and then I'll have something to
say about all of this one last question
supposed Russell this film were to be
looked at by our descendants like a Dead
Sea scroll in a thousand years time what
would you think it's worth telling that
generation about the life you've lived
and the lessons you've learned from it
I should like to say two things one
intellectual and one moral
the intellectual thing I should want to
say to them is this
when you are studying any matter or
considering any philosophy
ask yourself only
what are the facts and what is the truth
that the facts bear out never let
yourself be diverted either by what you
wish to believe or by what you think
could have been efficient social effects
if it were believed they looked only and
surely at what are the facts that is the
intellectual thing that I should wish to
say the moral thing I should wish to say
to them is very simple
I should say love is wise
hatred is foolish
in this world which is getting more and
more closely interconnected
to tolerate each other
okay so there we have it so broadly what
I think is that what he says is fine I
could quibble with you know some of what
he says but
I think more important to focus on is
the the blind spot that I think is there
and the blind spot is that
in a thousand years
won't they know all that you won't be
providing any insight surely if if
something is regarded as deep wisdom
today one would hope that insofar as
it's true it will be regarded as simple
background knowledge of the Common Man
and a thousand years from now or perhaps
a deep misconception of some kind the
idea that we could provide them with any
great Insight well that's astonishing to
me I'm not certain this is the case of
course but what wisdom or advice could a
person from the year
1023 give us today in
2023 about how to live the good life and
so on and given the rate of advancement
today is so much faster now I imagine in
relative terms 2023 is to 1023 as 21 23
years to 2023. in other words the last
thousand years of progress will be
roughly like the next centuries progress
and that's been conservative a thousand
years from now is not going to be like
the LA last Thousand Years imagine more
like ten thousand years of progress at
today's rate or much much more it's
literally unimaginable I couldn't begin
to think well my descendants in a
thousand years would think of us and
what we regard as wisdom and knowledge
what could I possibly say to them that
would be insightful or informative it
would be embarrassing to try and pass on
some deep wisdom to them well of course
I have imagined and I imagine the only
useful stuff I could say to a people A
Thousand Years hence would be if
progress did not continue and if it does
not and they're looking back through the
archives for advice from someone from a
thousand years ago in 2023 well goodness
poor them okay so to help with this I've
managed to get access to a program that
allows one to make High Fidelity
simulations of oneself for storage into
the future it's a high-tech version of a
chatbot you've seen these things getting
around they're becoming more and more
popular this one's a bit glitchy bear
with it it seems to be reading from a
teleprompter kind of like I am now or
something like that only it's doing it
pretty poorly and it's not always
looking straight at the camera and well
that can't
maybe future versions of it will fix
this anyways for now sit back and enjoy
my own message from my own simulation to
the people of the next millennium
hello there my name is Brett Hall I'm a
simulated version of the person with the
same name who lived last Millennium and
you've just searched the archives for my
civilization was destroyed in a
catastrophe what do I do now somehow
you've managed to get this old computer
to work on which you are viewing me now
and it seems open ai's chat GPT version
7.5 is still functional this is good I
think I can help you
I gather the year is
3025. okay then let's begin firstly I'm
terribly sorry to hear that you live in
a post-apocalyptic world
this was not Our intention it should not
have happened but given your
civilization was destroyed in the recent
past it can only be the reason that you
are now searching for ancient wisdom
that I possess unless of course you are
a historian of ideas I'll assume that's
not the case
so what went wrong can you provide me
with further information
oh you cannot you're 25 years old and
have lived your entire life like this
and no one around you knows why things
now are very similar to the way things
were a thousand years ago back when
there was fast progress
well happily the chat Bots and search
engines have led you here
topcast what's a podcast that existed in
the first part of the last Millennium
devoted to optimism and progress and
Drew upon the work of David Deutsch Carl
popper and others about how to sustain
rapid progress over time
but you tell me no one knows about any
of that now
well okay then give me a moment
it seems from the information I have
just managed together that at some point
your ancestors my descendants must have
been unable to solve life and
civilization threatening problems at a
rate faster than they encountered those
problems solutions must have become
elusive when they should not have been
what we learned is that this happens
most commonly when societies become what
is known as static they slow their rate
of progress this happens when societies
become less critical more uncritical
certain ideas for example are regarded
as sacred cows and taboos that cannot be
critiqued or in some cases even spoken
of whatever the case in your particular
circumstance you tell me you don't care
about any of that right now
well you should perhaps care about some
of it because it seems you occupy the
ashes of what could have been a mighty
power in the cosmos but instead here you
find yourself still upon this same Rock
and not far from where I was recorded
and coded so let me provide you with
some of the crucial knowledge you need
to get things up and running again in
the broadest possible terms consult the
archives for further particulars about
how to generate electricity at scale in
all kinds of weather at all times of day
and night and so on you want to be able
to do that
life-savingly crucial as that particular
knowledge is and much more besides I
want to provide you with what is
essentially deeper knowledge knowledge
about how to go about creating more
knowledge and resurrecting what we call
a dynamic Society a society that makes
rapid progress and therefore undergoes
rapid change but is stable while doing
so you may in your investigations and
attempts to recapitulate Lost knowledge
come up across the astonishing mind of
the 20th century physicist Richard
Feynman from Feynman you will be able to
learn very much and not least from what
he claimed was the one sentence that if
it could be transmitted it would convey
the deepest scientific knowledge should
it all have been lost in some terrible
cataclysm such as the one that is
apparently befallen you Feynman said
this sentence was quote all things are
made of atoms little particles that move
around in perpetual motion attracting
each other when they are a little
distance apart but repelling upon being
squeezed into one another end quote from
Feynman now that is very useful to know
indeed perhaps write it down right now
etch it into a nearby wall in case the
batteries of this computer go flat and
you lack a means of charging it pause
this video as you do so
back now okay now as I have already said
and crucial for you to appreciate right
now given your desperate situation there
is knowledge far deeper than what is
contained in that sentence finally
nominated as important to pass on
knowledge that can recapitulate as it
were not merely that sentence but all of
the rest for if one does begin with the
idea that all things are made of atoms
how exactly does one get from there to
anything else that might be true useful
or beautiful my own nomination for a
single sentence would be
problems are solved by incremental
detection and correction of errors in
existing knowledge this is how unbounded
progress happens and accelerates forever
revealing more and better problems and
deepening our understanding okay that's
my sentence happily for you it seems our
bandwidth Here and Now is not limited to
the transmission of single sentences so
allow me to unpack this with some
background you want to solve your
problems and improve things that is your
nature as a person solving problems
means finding Solutions and that means
creating knowledge
how is that done and what are the limits
to knowledge creation the answers to
these questions rest upon the work of
those two great Scholars I have already
mentioned Carl popper who gifted us with
this vision of problem solving as being
about correcting errors in existing
knowledge and David Deutsch who
emphasized and built upon the unbounded
possibilities that this process enables
a potential road to improvements that is
the beginning of an Infinity of
knowledge creation and problem solving
we now speak of optimism in deutsche's
sense an idea your Society has
unfortunately but apparently forgotten
but don't despair we are rebuilding and
it begins now of course none of anything
in the world view of popper and
deutsches any guarantee of success as
perhaps you now realize more than anyone
who has gone before you things can
indeed go wrong terribly so but going
wrong is part of the picture
and yet going wrong is just an error and
typically errors can be corrected unless
the thing that has gone wrong is the
destruction of error correction itself
what you want is to avoid also
encountering a problem so great that it
cannot be solved in time in time before
it kills you or destroys your
civilization that is to have the best
chance of having the knowledge to solve
the problems yet to be encountered you
want to make incremental progress as
fast as possible incremental so that
when an error is inevitably made you can
take a step back and change course but
if you've made a Great Leap Forward and
find out that whoops now that was the
wrong move you may be so far down the
road having taken this great leap the
turning back is just as difficult as
plowing ahead both will lead to costly
ruin of a kind and aside from
incremental progress it should be as
fast as possible and that means it will
take energy to fuel this knowledge
creation Pro project and resources to
house and keep comfortable wealthy and
happy the knowledge creators who are
these knowledge creators those of course
are people if you've not realized it yet
yes people like you the most important
things in the universe
but yes I know we too devalued people in
our time we worshiped the planet and the
environment I know we'll come back again
to that later let's focus on what you
need now to do in the broadest possible
terms
we have already mentioned that improving
your situation requires solving problems
solving problems requires creating
knowledge and knowledge creation is
about finding errors in existing
knowledge and correcting those errors
now here is the key correcting those
errors means conjecturing or creating
new explanations you cannot just observe
the world and derive Knowledge from
those observations of it and there is
also no Authority out there that has the
once and for all Final Answer who can
conjure into existence the perfect
explanation that will answer all of your
questions so ignore the priests and
Prophets especially in times like yours
who claim to know the future they cannot
know the future because the growth of
knowledge is inherently unpredictable if
it could be predicted today then you
would have the knowledge today and it
would not need to be created tomorrow so
one is led into a strict contradiction
knowledge generation is a genuine Act of
Creation
happily you as a person can do this you
can create or a group of people can
because again this is your nature to
create knowledge explanations find
solutions by correcting errors in what
it is you already know okay so carve
this into stone
do not destroy the means of error
correction error correction is a
precondition for making progress thank
David Deutsch for this particular moral
Maxim search your archives and you will
no doubt find his Works books and Ted
Talks where David offers two other stone
tablets I imagine there is much Rubble
around you
so if this is some kind of Revelation to
you take some of that detritus and carve
problems are soluble on one piece of
rubble and on another problems are
inevitable
the idea that problems are inevitable
might seem to be a source of Despair
well don't despair grab another piece of
rubble for that don't despair that
problems are inevitable is actually a
good thing and equaled only by the fact
that problems are soluble that problems
are inevitable even after some problems
are solved means progress will always
continue
forever each time you find a solution
create some new piece of knowledge make
a new discovery A Whole New World of
questions opens up that you did not even
know how to ask before
so Embrace problems not all problems
lead to evil many problems are just fun
what's the better move to make next in
chess how can we make that chocolate ice
cream still tastier what you need now
more than anything else is a stance of
optimism the principle of optimism due
to Deutsch is that all Evils are due to
a lack of knowledge so your own plight
right now is riddled with evil there is
disease and there may be starvation or
perhaps a natural disaster these should
have been solved in the centuries after
I made this content I should be there
beside you as an immortal just like you
but something has gone wrong well no
point worrying about that now you need
to understand that the evils that befall
you now are due merely to ignorance they
are due to you not knowing how to fix
that thing they aren't walls before you
preventing you from making progress just
obstacles of a kind to making the world
better to remedy an evil find the
solution to it get out out there and
find Solutions problems are soluble if
you guys have forgotten the chemical
Arbor process get on that quick grow
more crops on even smaller patches of
land using fertilizers and vertical
farming no matter what Doom the
naysayers around you predict the world
can indeed support an unlimited number
of people because there is an unlimited
amount of resources in your Universe
although knowledge is always scarce
because ignorance is infinite it is
knowledge that turns useless matter into
useful resources in principle the
Limitless hydrogen gas between stars and
galaxies can be used to construct
anything you need from the periodic
table and transform the cosmos around
you into a habitable region of space as
large as you like matter can be
transformed into keywords for all your
diseases and make you a body that lasts
forever no physical law stands in the
way of your infinite future
here I must take some blame alongside my
friends and the people of my time if
only we had convinced our own
politically powerful malthusians those
who argued resources were finite and
that the Earth was a fragile Place only
able to support a finite number of
people and worse still when they implied
human beings were themselves an evil of
a kind
we did not stand up strongly enough
against them and because of our failure
you find yourself now searching these
video archives for wisdom from the last
Millennium that's terribly sad and we
failed we failed to win the argument
progress slowed certain forms of error
correction were destroyed Even in our
Times Free Speech was beginning to be
limited somewhat in very many ways for
fear of causing offense or of spreading
the wrong sort of information or of not
conforming to what was officially
sanctioned many taboos were foisted Upon
Us during our time and too many
acquiesced to the demands the powerful
who wanted to control the collective
more than allowing the flourishing of
the individual and Cooperative
creativity democracies were in our time
increasingly overruled in favor of the
decrees of the elite supranational
organizations and forms of energy were
demonized so we were unable to make the
progress needed to correct some of our
errors that we encounter mounted fast
enough and so many of our fellow humans
failed to flourish as much as they might
have poverty was too easily tolerated
and restrictions placed on trade because
profit was demonized and even a modern
version of the Gaia hypothesis in poor
disguise was taught to our children
the environment became more important
than people we ceased to look to the
stars and instead
we looked at ourselves and engaged in
global self-flagellation I imagine this
only got worse which is why you find
yourself in the mire you are now in well
it does not need to befall you again the
Cure is to recognize another fact about
reality people human beings like you are
Universal problem solvers this means you
have a very special relationship to the
rest of the cosmos shared by no other
living thing that we know of you can
explain the rest of it and you can
improve those explanations over time
Without Limits and because of this you
as people are the most important
entities in the universe you contain
within you the most important form of
universality that has ever Arisen as a
consequence of the laws of physics that
govern this universe of ours that seems
hardly like a mere coincidence does it
the universe contains within it a
simulacrum of itself a self-similarity
in the form of an entity that can
comprehend the rest of it you and what
do you enable in this universe progress
the universe can improve over time for
people but only by people does progress
occur at all people are the most
important and Powerful agents of change
in physical reality that even the
evolution of entire stars and galaxies
cannot compete with in the long run even
the slow March of entropy is subject to
what people learn about how to harness
the as yet unknown physical phenomena
that govern everything that is and yet
might come to be
you can over time change the world
around you and change yourselves to
solve your problems through this process
of error detection and correction you
need not to be concerned about running
low on resources
worry only that you might not be
learning fast enough the problems will
continue to come at you but if you learn
fast enough then you can also create
wealth fast enough to have the power to
transform physical reality and bend it
to your will over time you can control
that planet of yours and from there
Reach Out Beyond with your explanations
and transform The Wider world and the
cosmos you can become like gods
don't let happen to your descendants
what we've apparently allowed to happen
to ours it's possible you will fail but
it's no guarantee the only guarantee of
failure is not trying
complete